Borderlands 3 Critique: No Guns, No Glory

INTRO: 

Borderlands is a guilty pleasure of mine.  Think of it as the Taco Bell of FPS
games. You know it's not good for you, but when it's 2 a.m and you've got a
craving, it hits the spot. With that analogy in mind, how does the latest entry
in this franchise hold up? Especially considering that other looter shooters
like Destiny and Warframe have become popular in recent years?


STORY:

I normally try to focus on a game's mechanics and combat, since that's where
meat of the  experience lies. Thus, story is mostly superfluous, especially
considering that most titles have awful narratives. However, there are game
that go beyond that and are hellbent at shoving in as much of their awful
writing as possible. Borderlands 3 is the prime example of this. Most of the
characters are simultaneously annoying and one-dimensional, which are
especially problematic considering they never shut the fuck up. While this was
a problem in previous entries, there were some redeeming aspects, such as
Handsome Jack's clever taunts in Borderlands 2.  Here, every returning
character has been flanderized to the point of being cariacatures of their
former selves. And that's not mentioning the new characters like Ava, who gives
me a brain aneurysm everytime she opens her fucking mouth.

And to make things more painful, the game is obsessed with its dank memes and
relentlessly bombards you with them throughout the campaign. Let me show you
how agonizing these are to sit through.

-- play memes quest and jabber moaning--

I suspect these are an attempt to cover up the game's trashfire of a story,
which hinges upon major characters being complete idiots and dying because they
conviently forgot their god powers existed. These issues are all exacerbated
because the game has multiple classes and a NG+ option for scaled quest
rewards. So if you want to max out all four vault hunters, you could be
potentially slogging the campaign eight times over. 

The lack of an option to skip the story and dialogue on subsequent playthroughs
kills any desire I have try another class or farm quest-related gear. However,
even if we had that option, the pacing would still be all over the place, but
more on that later. 

So, with that rant out of the way, let's examine the
gameplay of Borderlands 3, which thankfully fares much better.


GAMEPLAY: 

In series tradition, the introduction is terrible. The tutorial patronizingly
assumes you've never played a video game before and has you perform advanced
manuevers like jumping over a two foot ravine or pulling a lever right next to
you.  All of this occurs while you cringe at Claptrap's embarassingly unfunny
dialogue. Now, this intro could've worked if the game had any sort of
self-awareness and poked fun at the mundanity of tutorial, like in Far Cry 3:
Blood Dragon, but it's all played completely straight.

Thankfully, after enduring this shit for about 40 minutes, the game opens up
and you're free to explore Pandora to a limited extent. And here we enter
Borderlands 3's core gameplay loop: vehicular exploration, combat, loot, and
talking to Lilith. 

Let's address the elephant in the room: the bugs. For a game that's over six
months old, Borderlands 3 is a disaster. A small subset of the issues
I've had are: losing hours of saved progress, frequent crashes to desktop,
performance hitching, and unreliable multiplayer.

CONCLUSIONS:

Overall, I've got mixed feelings on Borderlands 3. On one hand, it's nice to see
drastic improvements to combat alongside many needed QOL tweaks. It's the first
time I can say that I've genuinely enjoyed the gunplay. On the other hand, the
series still masturbates to its awful meme-ridden humor, to the detriment of
the pacing. Borderlands does not need dank memes to be enjoyable, as the
gameplay stands on its own, but Gearbox still feels obliged to include them for some reason.


